YUMMY SEASONAL FOOD GAME
OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE GUIDE
================================

Document version: 1.1
Updated: 9 September 2026
Applies to: YUMMY_GAME_COMPLETE_REAR_WHEEL_DUST.zip


1. PURPOSE OF THIS DOCUMENT
---------------------------

This guide explains the concept, player flow, file structure and routine
maintenance of the YUMMY Seasonal Food Game. It is intended for teachers,
content editors, designers and future developers who did not participate in
the original development.

The packaged game build is the authoritative source. Keep an untouched backup
before making changes, change one area at a time, and test all four seasons and
all three difficulty levels after any data or logic update.


2. GAME CONCEPT
---------------

YUMMY is an English-language, four-choice seasonal food quiz for young
children. The game combines food education with a simple tractor journey.
Children identify foods associated with Spring, Summer, Autumn or Winter while
learning where each food comes from and how it grows.

The experience is designed around five principles:

1. Seasonal awareness: children connect foods with a season.
2. Visual recognition: every correct answer reveals a supplied food card.
3. Graduated learning: Easy, Medium and Hard create twelve stages in total.
4. Layered support: a small clue is always visible and a stronger hint is
   available from YUMMIE.
5. Low-pressure repetition: incorrect answers can be retried without losing
   the entire stage.

The visual direction is bright, clear and child-friendly. The title screen is
colourful but deliberately uncluttered. In the game field, vivid green grass
and a warm brown gravel road must remain easy to distinguish at a glance.


3. CURRENT GAME CONTENT
-----------------------

Seasons:       Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter
Difficulties:  Easy, Medium and Hard
Total stages:  12
Questions:     5 randomly chosen questions per stage
Answers:       4 choices per question
Correct card:  1 food from the chosen season and difficulty
Distractors:   3 foods from other seasons at the same difficulty

Current card totals:

- Spring: 50 cards
- Summer: 42 unique cards
- Autumn: 55 cards
- Winter: 43 cards

The Summer source upload contained duplicate files. Byte-for-byte duplicates
were removed. Two different Passion Fruit cards remain, but they share a group
so they cannot appear together in one game.


4. HOW A PLAYER USES THE GAME
-----------------------------

1. Open index.html in a modern browser.
2. Choose one season card and tractor:
   - Spring: Robbie
   - Summer: Brian
   - Autumn: Yanko
   - Winter: Graham
3. Choose Easy, Medium or Hard in the popup.
4. Select the Start button.
5. Wait for the tractor introduction to finish.
6. Read the seasonal question and the LITTLE CLUE.
7. Select one of the four food answers.
8. If more help is needed, select BIG HINT beside YUMMIE. The large hint gives
   the first letter and a more descriptive clue.
9. After a correct answer, read the food card, Origin and Grows information,
   then select NEXT.
10. After an incorrect answer, select Retry and answer the same question again.
11. Complete all five questions to reach the finish screen.

MAIN MENU in the lower-left corner returns to season selection during play.
Play Again on the finish screen also returns to season selection.


5. PROJECT FILES
----------------

index.html
  Defines the title screen, season cards, difficulty popup, game field,
  question panel, hint character, success/failure panels, finish screen and
  the decorative tractor-dust particle elements.

style.css
  Controls layout, colours, typography, grass and road textures, animation,
  responsive behaviour, seasonal effects and tractor dust. The file contains
  historical rules followed by later override sections. The final rules near
  the end of the file currently determine the title, game-field colours,
  seasonal ground treatments and dust effect.

script.js
  Controls season and difficulty selection, question generation, answer
  checking, clues, hints, progress, timer, tractor flow, scenery generation,
  retry, menu return and completion.

questions.js
  Stores the food records for all four seasons. Each record includes the food
  name, image path, origin, growing information, detailed clue and optional
  similarity group.

README.txt
  Provides a concise release summary and installation notes.

YUMMY_GAME_OPERATIONS_AND_MAINTENANCE_GUIDE.txt
  This complete operating and maintenance guide.

assets/cards/spring/
assets/cards/summer/
assets/cards/autumn/
assets/cards/winter/
  Seasonal food-card images.

Required runtime assets referenced by the code:

assets/tractors/
  spring-select.png, summer-select.png, autumn-select.png, winter-select.png
  spring-drive.png, summer-drive.png, autumn-drive.png, winter-drive.png

assets/scenery/
  Plant1.png, Plant2.png, Plant3.png, Chicken.png, Cow.png, Horse.png and
  Sheep.png

assets/yummie.png
  The YUMMIE hint character.

IMPORTANT: The tractor, scenery and YUMMIE artwork may be supplied by the host
project rather than the update ZIP. Do not delete the existing versions when
installing an update. If these assets are absent, the game logic can still load
but the corresponding images will appear broken or missing.


6. FOOD DATA FORMAT
--------------------

Food records are stored in questions.js. Example:

  {
    name: "Silverbeet",
    image: "silverbeet.png",
    origin: "Italy",
    grows: "As leafy stalks above the ground",
    clue: "This leafy vegetable has broad leaves and thick pale stalks.",
    group: "leafy-greens"
  }

Field meanings:

name
  The exact answer shown to the player. It is also used by the difficulty map.
  Spelling, spaces and pluralisation must match exactly.

image
  The filename inside that season's card folder. The season folder prefix is
  added automatically at the end of each seasonal array.

origin
  A short, child-friendly place of origin, domestication or early cultivation.
  Ancient foods may not have one universally agreed modern country of origin.

grows
  A brief description displayed after a correct answer. It also drives the
  automatically generated LITTLE CLUE.

clue
  The detailed descriptive clue revealed by YUMMIE as part of BIG HINT.

group (optional)
  A shared identifier for foods that should not appear together in one game,
  such as closely related citrus, beans or two designs of the same food.


7. HOW TO REPLACE A FOOD-CARD IMAGE
-----------------------------------

The safest method does not require code changes:

1. Find the existing image in assets/cards/<season>/.
2. Prepare a replacement PNG with a similar shape and transparent background
   where appropriate.
3. Give it exactly the same filename and extension.
4. Replace the old file.
5. Open that season and difficulty repeatedly until the card appears, or use
   the temporary testing method in Section 15.

Filenames are case-sensitive on many web servers. Potato.png and potato.png may
be treated as different files. Match the path written in questions.js exactly.

On Windows, a capitalisation-only rename may not be accepted immediately. Use
an intermediate name:

  horse.png -> horse_temp.png -> Horse.png

Do not rename a card merely to make its filename look tidier unless the image
field in questions.js is updated at the same time.


8. HOW TO ADD A NEW FOOD
------------------------

1. Add the new PNG to the correct assets/cards/<season>/ folder.
2. Open questions.js.
3. Add one food object to the correct seasonal array.
4. Verify name, image, origin, grows and clue.
5. Add group if the new food is easily confused with an existing food.
6. Open script.js and assign the food to the intended difficulty as described
   in Section 9.
7. Test the selected season/difficulty and the other seasons at that difficulty.

Example:

  {name:"Example Food",image:"example-food.png",origin:"Australia",
   grows:"On a small tree",clue:"A child-friendly descriptive clue.",
   group:"example-family"},

Keep commas between records. Do not remove the final .map(...) statement after
a seasonal array; it adds the correct season folder to every image path.


9. HOW DIFFICULTY ASSIGNMENT WORKS
----------------------------------

Difficulty is controlled by difficultyAssignments near the top of script.js.
Each season has explicit Easy and Medium name lists.

- If the exact food name is in easy, it is Easy.
- Otherwise, if the exact food name is in medium, it is Medium.
- Otherwise, it automatically becomes Hard.

This means a spelling mismatch or forgotten assignment silently sends a new
food to Hard. For example, "Leek" and "Leeks" are different names.

Maintenance procedure:

1. Copy the exact name from questions.js.
2. Add it to either the season's easy or medium list in script.js.
3. Leave it out of both lists only when Hard is intentional.
4. Keep at least five distinct, non-conflicting foods in every difficulty tier
   for every season.
5. Confirm that each difficulty also has enough foods in the other seasons to
   produce three distinct distractors.

Educational interpretation:

- Easy: familiar foods suitable for the youngest players.
- Medium: less familiar foods or names requiring some prior knowledge.
- Hard: uncommon foods and specialist vocabulary.

Age labels should be treated as guidance rather than a strict developmental
standard. Familiarity varies by culture, household and local food availability.


10. QUESTION, LITTLE CLUE AND BIG HINT
--------------------------------------

Seasonal question wording is stored in seasonQuestionPrompts in script.js.
There are five alternatives for each season, and one is chosen randomly for
each question.

The LITTLE CLUE is generated by buildLittleClue(grows). It scans the grows text
for words such as underground, tree, vine, bush, pod, leaf, stalk and water.
Therefore, changing the grows wording can also change the small clue category.

The BIG HINT is assembled from:

- The first letter of the correct food name.
- The detailed clue field from questions.js.

The intended hierarchy is:

- LITTLE CLUE: mild support that does not reveal the answer immediately.
- BIG HINT: optional, decisive support after the player asks YUMMIE for help.

When editing, do not make the LITTLE CLUE as specific as the BIG HINT. Avoid
putting the food name directly inside either clue.


11. QUESTION GENERATION RULES
-----------------------------

buildFoodQuiz() in script.js performs the following steps:

1. Filters the chosen season to the selected difficulty.
2. Randomly chooses up to five foods.
3. Prevents two foods with the same group from becoming correct answers in the
   same stage.
4. Builds a pool of foods from the other three seasons at the same difficulty.
5. Excludes foods whose names also occur in the selected season.
6. Selects three distractors with unique names and groups.
7. Randomises the visible position of all four answers.

Important safeguards:

- Keep food names consistent across questions.js and difficultyAssignments.
- Use group for visually or semantically confusing relatives.
- Do not reduce a tier below five usable correct-answer foods.
- Do not create so many shared groups that fewer than five foods remain usable.
- When adding a food to more than one season, remember that it cannot be used
  as a distractor against a season that already contains the same name.


12. HOW TO REPLACE TRACTORS, ANIMALS OR FLOWERS
-----------------------------------------------

For a direct visual replacement, overwrite the existing file with a new PNG
using the same folder, filename, extension and capitalisation.

Title tractor paths are in index.html.
Driving tractor paths are selected in script.js.
Moving scenery paths are listed in sceneryImages in script.js.
YUMMIE is referenced in index.html as assets/yummie.png.

To add a new random scenery item:

1. Put its image in assets/scenery/.
2. Add its path to sceneryImages in script.js.
3. Use a transparent PNG and a similar visual scale to existing scenery.
4. Test both the left and right grass areas.

Each moving scenery element removes itself after its animation ends. Preserve
the animationend removal code; it prevents animals from stacking at the bottom
of the screen.


13. VISUAL MAINTENANCE
----------------------

Current design goals:

- Keep the title screen cheerful but uncluttered.
- Use large colour areas instead of many decorative dots or small ornaments.
- Preserve generous spacing and rounded shapes.
- Keep the four season cards visually distinct.
- Make grass unmistakably green.
- Make the gravel road unmistakably warm brown.
- Maintain strong grass/road separation for preschool users.
- Keep question and result panels light enough for clear reading.
- Give every season a recognisable Australian outdoor character without
  reducing the readability of the road or answer area.
- Keep seasonal decorations organic and irregular. Leaves and snow must not
  form repeated rows across the road.

Important CSS note:

style.css contains older styling followed by newer overrides. The final section
labelled POP TITLE + SUNNY GAME FIELD intentionally wins in the cascade. If a
colour appears not to change, search for the same selector later in style.css.
Prefer editing the final override section unless performing a carefully tested
full CSS cleanup.

Current key final colours:

- Game-area/grass base: #78d653
- Grass gradient: #67c943 to #8de163
- Road base: #d9a15f
- Road gradient: #c58745 to #e8b873
- Road edge: #a96e35

Use sufficient contrast, but avoid making the texture so dense that it competes
with answer buttons, moving scenery or food imagery.

Seasonal ground direction:

- Spring: fresh bright grass, visible flowers and lively new growth.
- Summer: sunny, dry Australian grass accents and a warm dusty gravel road.
- Autumn: warmer grass, scattered fallen leaves and richer earth tones.
  Leaves may collect naturally beside the road, but should not appear as an
  evenly spaced procession across the driving surface.
- Winter: cooler grass, pale frost or snow accumulation near the verges and a
  slightly cooler road. Snow should gather in irregular patches rather than
  repeated rows on the road.

The active season is applied through data-season on #game-area. Seasonal CSS
should therefore be scoped beneath selectors such as:

  #game-area[data-season="autumn"]

Do not create seasonal visuals by permanently changing the shared base road or
grass rules. Always verify all four seasons after changing a seasonal selector.

Tractor dust:

- index.html contains .tractor-dust with eight span particles immediately
  before the driving tractor.
- The final TRACTOR DUST section in style.css controls its position, colour,
  size and animation.
- Dust starts at the rear-wheel contact points, rises and spreads outward.
- Keep the starting points visually attached to the rear wheels. Increasing
  the dust container width can make the clouds look detached from the tractor.
- The dust uses a z-index above the tractor so it remains visible, but it must
  not obscure the tractor body or gameplay controls.
- The effect runs while #game-screen has the active class and is hidden when
  the user requests reduced motion.

Current desktop dust alignment uses a container width of up to 500px, a bottom
offset of approximately 34px and left/right particle origins at 17 percent.
Treat these values as a matched set. If the tractor artwork or its 600px display
width changes, recalibrate all three values together.


14. CHANGING GAME LENGTH OR TIMING
----------------------------------

Number of questions:
  Change questionsPerGame near the top of script.js. If this is changed, also
  review the title footnote, intro copy, progress dots and documentation.

Intro driving delay:
  startDriving() waits 3000 milliseconds before showing a question.

Scenery frequency:
  New scenery is created every 800 milliseconds near the end of script.js.

Scenery travel time:
  Each item receives a random duration between approximately 5 and 8 seconds.

Be cautious when increasing scenery frequency or animation duration, because
too many simultaneous images can distract children and reduce performance on
older devices.


15. TESTING CHECKLIST
---------------------

Run this checklist after every release:

Opening and navigation
[ ] index.html opens without a blank screen.
[ ] All four title tractors are visible.
[ ] Each season card opens the difficulty popup.
[ ] Easy, Medium and Hard enable the Start button.
[ ] Enter and Space activate a focused season card.
[ ] Escape and the close button dismiss the difficulty popup.

All twelve stages
[ ] Spring Easy, Medium and Hard start.
[ ] Summer Easy, Medium and Hard start.
[ ] Autumn Easy, Medium and Hard start.
[ ] Winter Easy, Medium and Hard start.
[ ] Every stage contains five questions.
[ ] Every question displays four non-empty answers.
[ ] Exactly one visible answer is correct.

Learning flow
[ ] LITTLE CLUE appears below each question.
[ ] BIG HINT reveals a first letter and detailed clue.
[ ] Correct answers display the correct image, name, Origin and Grows fields.
[ ] NEXT moves to the following question.
[ ] Incorrect answers display the correct seasonal failure message.
[ ] Retry returns to the same question.
[ ] The fifth correct answer opens the finish screen.

Visual and animation checks
[ ] Grass is vivid green and clearly textured.
[ ] Road is warm brown, visibly gravelled and clearly separated from grass.
[ ] Spring flowers and fresh growth are clearly visible.
[ ] Summer has a sunny, dry Australian character.
[ ] Autumn leaves are visible and naturally scattered beside the road.
[ ] Winter frost or snow is visible in irregular verge patches.
[ ] Autumn leaves and winter snow do not form repeated rows across the road.
[ ] Text remains readable over every background.
[ ] Tractor remains fixed near the bottom during play.
[ ] Dust begins at the rear-wheel contact points rather than away from the
    tractor.
[ ] Dust remains clearly visible without covering the tractor or controls.
[ ] Dust positioning remains attached to the wheels on a narrow screen.
[ ] Animals and plants disappear after leaving the screen.
[ ] No scenery remains stacked at the bottom.
[ ] Layout works on desktop and a narrow mobile-sized window.

File checks
[ ] Every questions.js image path points to an existing file.
[ ] Filename capitalisation matches exactly.
[ ] script.js passes: node --check script.js
[ ] questions.js passes: node --check questions.js
[ ] The final ZIP passes an archive integrity test.

Temporary targeted testing method:

When a newly added food is difficult to encounter randomly, temporarily place
only that food and four known foods in the appropriate difficulty tier, test,
then restore the complete list. Never distribute the temporary test list.


16. COMMON PROBLEMS AND FIXES
-----------------------------

Problem: A food image is missing after a correct answer.
Check: The image filename, extension, season folder and capitalisation.

Problem: A newly added food appears in Hard instead of Easy or Medium.
Check: Its exact name is missing or mismatched in difficultyAssignments.

Problem: A stage contains fewer than five questions.
Check: The selected tier has fewer than five usable foods, or too many foods
share the same group.

Problem: An answer button is blank or there are fewer than four valid choices.
Check: Other seasons do not provide three distinct distractors at the same
difficulty, or group restrictions are too broad.

Problem: Two nearly identical foods appear together.
Check: Add the same group value to both records.

Problem: The LITTLE CLUE is inaccurate.
Check: Revise grows so buildLittleClue() recognises the correct category, or
extend buildLittleClue() carefully.

Problem: A CSS colour edit does not appear.
Check: A later rule overrides it. Inspect the final section of style.css and
browser cache. Perform a hard refresh after replacing CSS.

Problem: Tractor, animals or YUMMIE are missing.
Check: The host project still contains assets/tractors/, assets/scenery/ and
assets/yummie.png. These may not be bundled with a content-only update ZIP.

Problem: Animals remain at the bottom of the screen.
Check: The field-item animation still fires animationend and the handler still
calls img.remove().

Problem: MAIN MENU leaves old visual effects behind.
Check: The return handler still clears document.body.className and resets the
success, failure, selection and difficulty states.

Problem: Tractor dust is too faint or completely hidden.
Check: .tractor-dust is above the tractor in the stacking order, the game screen
has the active class, and prefers-reduced-motion is not enabled in the operating
system or browser.

Problem: Tractor dust is visible but appears detached from the rear wheels.
Check: The final TRACTOR DUST rules. Restore the desktop container to roughly
500px wide, keep the bottom offset near 34px and keep odd/even particle origins
near 17 percent. Do not solve visibility by moving the particle origins far
outside the tractor.

Problem: Seasonal leaves or snow form artificial-looking rows on the road.
Check: Remove repeating gradients or evenly spaced road overlays for those
objects. Keep larger seasonal decorations irregular and concentrated near the
grass or road verges.

Problem: Local index.html shows the update but GitHub Pages does not.
Check: Confirm that the latest Pages deployment succeeded, perform a hard
refresh and verify that Pages is publishing from the branch and folder where
the updated files were committed. See Section 17.


17. UPDATING THE GITHUB PAGES VERSION
-------------------------------------

The current project can be maintained entirely through the GitHub website.

For a one-file update:

1. Open the repository and confirm that the Pages source is the main branch and
   the repository root, unless the project has intentionally been configured
   differently.
2. Delete the old file or use GitHub's file editor/upload replacement flow.
3. Upload the updated file at exactly the same path and with the same filename.
4. Commit directly to main for a simple authorised maintenance update, or use a
   branch and pull request when review is required.
5. Open the Actions tab and wait for the latest Pages build and deployment to
   complete successfully.
6. Open the published game and perform a hard refresh:
   Windows: Ctrl + F5
   macOS: Command + Shift + R
7. Test the published version, not only a locally opened index.html.

For the current rear-wheel dust release, only style.css needs replacement if
the immediately preceding complete build is already installed. Keep the dust
elements previously added to index.html.

If a local file works but the Pages site still looks old, open the published
style.css URL directly and search for a known new rule. For this release useful
markers include:

  width:min(500px, 58vw);
  z-index:74;

If those rules exist in the published CSS, the deployment is current and the
remaining issue is usually browser caching. If they do not exist, check the
Pages source branch/folder and the latest deployment status.

For recurring CSS cache problems, version the stylesheet reference in
index.html:

  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css?v=2">

Increase the number after a future CSS release. This requires committing the
updated index.html as well as style.css.


18. SAFE RELEASE PROCEDURE
--------------------------

1. Duplicate the current authoritative build.
2. Make changes in the duplicate.
3. Do not delete unrelated artwork or user changes.
4. Run the complete testing checklist.
5. Confirm all image references.
6. Confirm JavaScript syntax.
7. Compress the contents so index.html is at the ZIP root, not inside an extra
   nested folder.
8. Test the ZIP for corruption.
9. Give the release a clear date or version note.
10. Update this guide and README.txt when behaviour, file structure, visual
    direction or maintenance procedures change.


19. CONTENT AND EDUCATIONAL REVIEW
----------------------------------

Seasonality differs by country, climate and supply system. This game reflects
the supplied seasonal sets and uses Australian English terms such as Autumn,
Capsicum, Silverbeet, Rockmelon and Witlof. Before deploying in another region,
have a local food educator review seasonal membership and vocabulary.

Origin labels are deliberately short for young children. They refer broadly to
origin, domestication, early cultivation or a best-known historical association.
They should not be presented as definitive academic claims where evidence is
disputed. Any major content revision should be checked by an educator or a
reliable horticultural source.


20. ITEMS THAT SHOULD NOT BE REMOVED ACCIDENTALLY
-------------------------------------------------

- Four seasons and three difficulty levels.
- Random five-question selection.
- Same-difficulty distractors.
- Similar-food group protection.
- LITTLE CLUE below the question.
- Optional YUMMIE BIG HINT.
- Correct food-card reveal with Origin and Grows.
- Manual NEXT button.
- MAIN MENU during play.
- Fixed bottom tractor.
- Rear-wheel dust particles and their reduced-motion fallback.
- Season-specific ground treatments.
- Irregular placement of Autumn leaves and Winter snow near the road edges.
- Automatic removal of off-screen scenery.
- Question progress label and five progress dots.
- Keyboard support for season cards.
- Responsive mobile layout.


End of guide.
